# The end

## Differences from antirez's code

He wrote it in "a few hours across two weekends with programmed family
activities and meat to prepare for friends in long barbecue sessions." He
reused a lot of code from his `linenoise` and `LOAD81` projects. So the code
was kind of messy, with bugs from lack of testing various edge cases and code
paths. It wasn't really suitable to use for a programming tutorial like this.
However, once I fixed many of the bugs (with the help of the issues and pull
requests submitted to [kilo on GitHub](https://github.com/antirez/kilo)) and
cleaned up the code a bit, it turned out to be a great program to use for this
kind of tutorial.

* scrolling
* `rx`
* nonprintables
* `die()`
* `editorPrompt()` with callback

## Ideas for features to add on your own

* Line numbers
* Automatic indentation
* "Hard" line wrapping (insert a new line when the user types past the end of
  the screen)
* "Soft" line wrapping (use multiple lines on the screen to display single
  lines that are too long)

## How the diffs work

explain each part of the diff, and how deletions are elided

## What to do when you get stuck

how to do a diff between your `kilo.c` and the step your on's `kilo.c`

## Where to get help

github issues? forum? my email?

## How this was made

leg, snaptoken

## How to contribute

how to modify the doc, how to modify the code

## More tutorials like this

I am planning to make more tutorials like this one. They will all be available
at [viewsourcecode.org/snaptoken](http://viewsourcecode.org/snaptoken). There
is a link there that will let you sign up to receive an email whenever a new
tutorial is available. There is also a list of similar tutorials/books that
I've found around the web.

## Credits

Antirez, openemacs, various bug fixers/reporters at those repos

## License

BSD-2-Clause + CC BY 4.0

